t_barrier_expressions.adb:101:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:99:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:97:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:95:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:93:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:91:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:89:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:87:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:85:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:83:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:81:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:79:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:77:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:75:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:73:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:71:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:69:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:67:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:61:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined logical operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:63:12: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: short-circuit control form
t_barrier_expressions.adb:62:12: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: membership test
t_barrier_expressions.adb:62:10: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:62:20: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: value attribute
t_barrier_expressions.adb:65:12: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined comparison operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:64:25: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined arithmetic operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:64:15: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined arithmetic operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:64:13: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:64:19: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined arithmetic operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:64:17: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:64:22: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:64:29: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:68:11: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined comparison operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:68:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:68:13: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: conversion or qualified expression
t_barrier_expressions.adb:70:11: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined comparison operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:70:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:70:13: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: conversion or qualified expression
t_barrier_expressions.adb:72:11: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined comparison operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:72:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:72:13: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: allocation
t_barrier_expressions.adb:72:17: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: conversion or qualified expression
t_barrier_expressions.adb:74:13: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined comparison operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:74:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:76:21: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined comparison operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:76:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: indexing
t_barrier_expressions.adb:76:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:76:12: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: value attribute
t_barrier_expressions.adb:78:26: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined comparison operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:78:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: slice
t_barrier_expressions.adb:78:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:78:12: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: value attribute
t_barrier_expressions.adb:80:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: local function call
t_barrier_expressions.adb:80:16: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:82:17: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined comparison operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:82:11: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: dereference
t_barrier_expressions.adb:82:11: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:84:13: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: dereference
t_barrier_expressions.adb:84:13: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: variable
t_barrier_expressions.adb:84:24: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:86:13: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: dereference
t_barrier_expressions.adb:86:13: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: variable
t_barrier_expressions.adb:86:20: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:88:13: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-local function call
t_barrier_expressions.adb:90:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: value attribute
t_barrier_expressions.adb:92:26: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined comparison operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:92:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: callable attribute
t_barrier_expressions.adb:92:23: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:94:12: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined comparison operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:94:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:94:14: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: conversion or qualified expression
t_barrier_expressions.adb:94:26: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: record aggregate
t_barrier_expressions.adb:96:12: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined comparison operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:96:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:96:14: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: conversion or qualified expression
t_barrier_expressions.adb:96:35: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: record extension
t_barrier_expressions.adb:96:36: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:98:11: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined comparison operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:98:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:98:13: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: conversion or qualified expression
t_barrier_expressions.adb:98:20: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: array aggregate
t_barrier_expressions.adb:100:11: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined comparison operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:100:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:100:13: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: conversion or qualified expression
t_barrier_expressions.adb:100:20: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: array aggregate
t_barrier_expressions.adb:102:11: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: predefined comparison operator
t_barrier_expressions.adb:102:9: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: non-boolean protected component
t_barrier_expressions.adb:102:13: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: conversion or qualified expression
t_barrier_expressions.adb:102:20: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: array aggregate
t_barrier_expressions.adb:102:24: Error: BARRIER_EXPRESSIONS: variable
