t_improper_initialization.adb:44:13: Found: Variables: use of uninitialized variable: TV
t_improper_initialization.adb:31:32: Error: Parameters: out parameter "IP" not safely initialized
t_improper_initialization.adb:37:10: Found: Variables: variable "TV" used before initialisation
t_improper_initialization.adb:62:17: Found: Variables: use of uninitialized variable: IV8
t_improper_initialization.adb:63:17: Found: Variables: use of uninitialized variable: IV9
t_improper_initialization.adb:51:36: Error: Parameters: out parameter "IP" not safely initialized
t_improper_initialization.adb:55:10: Error: Bad_Init: variable "IV5" unnecessarily initialized in declaration
t_improper_initialization.adb:58:10: Found: Variables: variable "IV8" used before initialisation
t_improper_initialization.adb:58:15: Found: Variables: variable "IV9" used before initialisation
t_improper_initialization.adb:75:38: Error: Parameters: out parameter "BP" not safely initialized before line 95
t_improper_initialization.adb:82:10: Error: Bad_Init: variable "CV2" unnecessarily initialized in declaration
t_improper_initialization.adb:74:38: Error: Parameters: out parameter "IP1" not safely initialized before line 95
t_improper_initialization.adb:74:43: Error: Parameters: out parameter "IP2" not safely initialized before line 95
t_improper_initialization.adb:116:15: Found: Variables: use of uninitialized variable: B
t_improper_initialization.adb:114:10: Found: Variables: variable "B" used before initialisation
t_improper_initialization.adb:112:10: Found: Variables: variable "IV1" not safely initialized before line 117
t_improper_initialization.adb:113:10: Found: Variables: variable "IV2" not safely initialized before line 117
t_improper_initialization.adb:113:15: Found: Variables: variable "IV3" not safely initialized before line 117
t_improper_initialization.adb:118:20: Error: Parameters: use of uninitialized out parameter: IP
t_improper_initialization.adb:117:26: Error: Parameters: out parameter "IP" used before initialisation
t_improper_initialization.adb:133:26: Error: Parameters: out parameter "IP" not safely initialized
t_improper_initialization.adb:137:26: Error: Parameters: out parameter "IP" not safely initialized
t_improper_initialization.adb:169:27: Error: Parameters: out parameter "BP" not safely initialized
t_improper_initialization.adb:179:13: Found: Variables: variable "IV" not safely initialized
t_improper_initialization-sep.adb:2:22: Error: Parameters: out parameter "Var2" not safely initialized
t_improper_initialization.adb:219:16: Error: Parameters: use of uninitialized out parameter: I
t_improper_initialization.adb:220:20: Error: Parameters: use of uninitialized out parameter: I
t_improper_initialization.adb:221:18: Error: Parameters: use of uninitialized out parameter: I
t_improper_initialization.adb:222:32: Error: Parameters: use of uninitialized out parameter: I
t_improper_initialization.adb:226:13: Error: Parameters: use of uninitialized out parameter: AS
t_improper_initialization.adb:210:37: Error: Parameters: out parameter "AS" used before initialisation
t_improper_initialization.adb:210:20: Error: Parameters: out parameter "I" used before initialisation
t_improper_initialization.adb:209:20: Error: Parameters: out parameter "S" not safely initialized
t_improper_initialization.adb:211:7: Found: Variables: variable "S2" not safely initialized
t_improper_initialization.adb:239:7: Found: Variables: variable "IV" not safely initialized
t_improper_initialization.adb:270:67: Found: Variables: use of uninitialized variable: I
t_improper_initialization.adb:273:41: Found: Variables: use of uninitialized variable: K
t_improper_initialization.adb:273:35: Found: Variables: use of uninitialized variable: J
t_improper_initialization.adb:274:35: Found: Variables: use of uninitialized variable: L
t_improper_initialization.adb:251:7: Found: Variables: variable "I" used before initialisation
t_improper_initialization.adb:251:10: Found: Variables: variable "J" used before initialisation
t_improper_initialization.adb:251:13: Found: Variables: variable "K" used before initialisation
t_improper_initialization.adb:251:16: Found: Variables: variable "L" used before initialisation
t_improper_initialization.adb:311:7: Found: Variables: variable "I1" not safely initialized
t_improper_initialization.adb:333:7: Found: Variables: variable "V" not safely initialized before line 335
t_improper_initialization.adb:361:25: Found: Variables: use of uninitialized variable: A
t_improper_initialization.adb:367:15: Found: Variables: use of uninitialized variable: A
t_improper_initialization.adb:368:13: Found: Variables: use of uninitialized variable: A
t_improper_initialization.adb:355:7: Found: Variables: variable "A" used before initialisation
t_improper_initialization.adb:356:7: Found: Variables: variable "S" not safely initialized
