t_silent_exceptions.adb:26:7: Found: Only_Procedure: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:62:7: Found: Only_Procedure: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:68:7: Error: SILENT_EXCEPTIONS: some paths are silent in exception handler, check manually
t_silent_exceptions.adb:73:7: Error: SILENT_EXCEPTIONS: some paths are silent in exception handler, check manually
t_silent_exceptions.adb:88:6: Error: SILENT_EXCEPTIONS: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:94:6: Error: SILENT_EXCEPTIONS: some paths are silent in exception handler, check manually
t_silent_exceptions.adb:100:7: Found: Only_Procedure: some paths are silent in exception handler, check manually
t_silent_exceptions.adb:107:7: Error: SILENT_EXCEPTIONS: some paths are silent in exception handler, check manually
t_silent_exceptions.adb:122:7: Found: Only_Procedure: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:125:7: Found: Only_Procedure: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:132:7: Error: SILENT_EXCEPTIONS: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:135:7: Error: SILENT_EXCEPTIONS: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:138:7: Found: Only_Procedure: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:141:7: Error: SILENT_EXCEPTIONS: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:157:7: Error: SILENT_EXCEPTIONS: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:163:7: Found: Only_Procedure: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:169:7: Found: Only_Procedure: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:196:7: Found: Only_Procedure: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:202:7: Found: Only_Procedure: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:211:7: Error: SILENT_EXCEPTIONS: some paths are silent in exception handler, check manually
t_silent_exceptions.adb:218:7: Error: SILENT_EXCEPTIONS: some paths are silent in exception handler, check manually
t_silent_exceptions.adb:254:13: Found: Only_Procedure: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:266:7: Found: Only_Procedure: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:275:10: Found: Only_Procedure: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:279:10: Found: Only_Procedure: all paths are silent in exception handler
t_silent_exceptions.adb:289:10: Error: SILENT_EXCEPTIONS: some paths are silent in exception handler, check manually

Counts summary:
No_SP_Call: 19
