t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:34:57: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:35:57: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'RANGE replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:39:32: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:40:32: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'RANGE replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:56:20: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'RANGE replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:58:16: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:72:13: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:76:13: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:79:13: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:100:13: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:103:13: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'RANGE replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:109:13: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:113:13: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (T)'Range
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:117:14: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (T)'Range
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:122:9: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (T)'Range
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:124:11: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (T)'Range
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:127:9: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:129:9: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:132:9: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:133:9: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:137:9: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (sub)type(T)
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:140:9: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (T)'Range
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_range.adb:142:13: Error: Range_Or_True: (T)'First .. (T)'Last replaceable with (T)'Range
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:10:19: Found: False: Simplify expression '<expr> = False' to 'not <expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:11:28: Found: False: Simplify expression '<expr> = False' to 'not <expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:13:35: Found: False: Simplify expression '<expr> = False' to 'not <expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:23:7: Found: False: Simplify expression '<expr> = False' to 'not <expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:23:26: Error: Range_Or_True: Simplify expression '<expr> = True' to just '<expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:23:30: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:25:10: Found: False: Simplify expression '<expr> = False' to 'not <expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:26:12: Found: False: Simplify expression '<expr> = False' to 'not <expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:27:10: Found: False: Simplify expression '<expr> /= False' to just '<expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:29:10: Error: Range_Or_True: Simplify expression '<expr> = True' to just '<expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:31:10: Error: Range_Or_True: Simplify expression '<expr> /= True' to 'not <expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:33:10: Found: False: Simplify expression 'False = <expr>' to 'not <expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:34:12: Found: False: Simplify expression '<expr> = False' to 'not <expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:35:10: Found: False: Simplify expression 'False /= <expr>' to just '<expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:37:10: Error: Range_Or_True: Simplify expression 'True = <expr>' to just '<expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:39:10: Error: Range_Or_True: Simplify expression 'True /= <expr>' to 'not <expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:43:10: Found: False: Simplify expression '<expr> = False' to 'not <expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:43:24: Found: False: Simplify expression '<expr> = False' to 'not <expr>'
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_logical.adb:47:7: Found: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: "not" on comparison
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:15:16: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:17:16: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:21:20: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:32:35: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:34:35: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:43:32: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:44:37: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:46:32: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:51:10: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:57:7: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:59:10: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:70:9: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:79:7: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:80:7: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:80:8: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:80:9: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:81:7: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:88:13: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:89:9: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:91:13: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:92:16: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:93:17: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:94:13: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:95:14: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:102:13: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:104:9: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:109:24: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:110:24: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:112:9: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:113:24: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:114:24: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:117:11: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:117:33: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:118:16: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:118:43: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:120:11: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:120:12: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:120:24: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:120:52: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:123:11: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:123:16: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:124:11: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:124:22: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:126:14: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:126:15: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:129:9: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:129:27: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:131:9: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:132:9: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_parentheses.adb:135:14: Error: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: Unnecessary parentheses in expression
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_conversion.adb:9:9: Found: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: unnecessary conversion
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_conversion.adb:10:9: Found: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: unnecessary conversion
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_conversion.adb:12:9: Found: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: unnecessary conversion
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_conversion.adb:16:9: Found: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: unnecessary conversion
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_conversion.adb:17:9: Found: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: unnecessary conversion
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_conversion.adb:18:9: Found: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: unnecessary conversion
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_conversion.adb:19:9: Found: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: unnecessary conversion
t_simplifiable_expressions-test_conversion.adb:25:9: Found: SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: unnecessary conversion

Counts summary:
SIMPLIFIABLE_EXPRESSIONS: 100
