t_specification_objects.adb:15:7: Error: SPECIFICATION_OBJECTS: (generic) Gen.Y1, initialized, written, not read
t_specification_objects.adb:16:7: Error: SPECIFICATION_OBJECTS: (generic) Gen.Y2, not initialized, written, not read
t_specification_objects.adb:17:7: Found: Constantable: (generic) Gen.Y3, initialized, not written, read (can be declared constant)
t_specification_objects.adb:18:7: Found: Removable: (generic) Gen.Z, constant, not read (can be removed)
t_specification_objects.adb:29:4: Error: SPECIFICATION_OBJECTS: (instance) Inst1.Y1, initialized, written, not read
t_specification_objects.adb:29:4: Error: SPECIFICATION_OBJECTS: (instance) Inst1.Y2, not initialized, written, not read
t_specification_objects.adb:29:4: Found: Removable: (instance) Inst1.Y3, initialized, not written, not read
t_specification_objects.adb:29:4: Found: Removable: (instance) Inst1.Z, constant, not read
t_specification_objects.adb:30:4: Found: Removable: (instance) Inst2.Y1, initialized, not written, not read
t_specification_objects.adb:30:4: Error: SPECIFICATION_OBJECTS: (instance) Inst2.Y2, not initialized, written, not read
t_specification_objects.adb:30:4: Found: Constantable: (instance) Inst2.Y3, initialized, not written, read
t_specification_objects.adb:30:4: Found: Removable: (instance) Inst2.Z, constant, not read
t_specification_objects.adb:33:7: Error: SPECIFICATION_OBJECTS: (normal) Pack.A1, not initialized, written, read
t_specification_objects.adb:33:11: Error: SPECIFICATION_OBJECTS: (normal) Pack.A2, not initialized, written, not read
t_specification_objects.adb:34:7: Found: Constantable: (normal) Pack.A3, initialized, not written, read (can be declared constant)
t_specification_objects.adb:35:7: Found: Removable: (normal) Pack.A4, not initialized, not written, not read (can be removed)
t_specification_objects.adb:45:7: Found: Constantable: (normal) Pack.Ac, initialized, not written, read (can be declared constant)
t_specification_objects.adb:36:7: Found: Removable: (normal) Pack.B, constant, not read (can be removed)
t_specification_objects.adb:38:7: Found: Constantable: (normal) Pack.D, not initialized, not written, read (never given a value)
t_specification_objects.adb:38:9: Error: SPECIFICATION_OBJECTS: (normal) Pack.E, not initialized, written, not read
t_specification_objects.adb:38:11: Error: SPECIFICATION_OBJECTS: (normal) Pack.F, not initialized, written, read
t_specification_objects.adb:40:7: Found: Removable: (normal) Pack.I1, constant, not read (can be removed)
t_specification_objects.adb:42:7: Found: Removable: (normal) Pack.R, constant, not read (can be removed)
t_specification_objects.adb:49:7: Found: Removable: (normal) Pack.V1, initialized, not written, not read (can be removed)
t_specification_objects.adb:51:7: Found: Removable: (normal) Pack.V2, initialized, not written, not read (can be removed)
t_specification_objects.adb:52:7: Found: Removable: (normal) Pack.V3, initialized, not written, not read (can be removed)
t_specification_objects.adb:57:7: Found: Removable: (normal) Pack.V4, not initialized, not written, not read (can be removed)
t_specification_objects.adb:60:7: Found: Removable: (normal) Pack.V5, initialized, not written, not read (can be removed)
t_specification_objects.adb:44:7: Error: SPECIFICATION_OBJECTS: (normal) Pack.VR, not initialized, written, not read
t_specification_objects.adb:62:7: Found: Removable: (normal) Pack.XX, not initialized, not written, not read (can be removed)
t_specification_objects.adb:53:7: Found: Removable: (normal) Pack.Y, initialized, not written, not read (can be removed)
t_specification_objects.adb:54:7: Found: Removable: (normal) Pack.Z, initialized, not written, not read (can be removed)
